# respect matrix
(c) mark p xu neyer
2015
bsd

Define a respect matrix as follows: Entry `M[i,j]` is a real number in `[-1,1]` representing how much person `i` respects person `j`.

The matrix M is initialized as an identity matrix: everyone is assumed to respect themselves and to have no opinion of everyone else. Each person `i` can add whatever value they want, to entry `i,j` specifying how much they respect person `j`. 1 means total respect , -1 means absolute disrespect.

Let a 'respect path from a to b' be a sequence of indices `p = [i_1 = a, i_2, i_3... i_n = b]` starting with 'a' and ending with 'b'. We can compute the 'implied respect' of that path as follows:

    def implied_respect(M, p):
      # assume people respect themselves 
      total = 1
      last_edge_positive = True
    
      # go through this path one step at a time
      for a,b in by_consecutive_pairs(p): 
    
        if last_edge_positive:
          this_respect = M[a,b]
        else:
          this_respect = M[b,a]
    
        if this_respect == 0:
          return 0
    
        total = total*this_respect
        # invariant:
        # `total` contains the implied respect of p[0] for b
        last_edge_positive = this_respect > 0
    
      return total

This value is the 'implied respect' of path p from person a towards person b

You can see from this that if person a has a negative respect towards person b, they will also have a negative respect towards anyone who respects person b - but not the people person b respects.  Negative respect values cause a 'flip' of the direction of the edge that is inspected for the next coefficient.  If A has negative respect for B, the next thing we look at is how C feels about B. If C respects B, and A has negative respect for B, then A _also_ has negative respect for C. This prevents B from trolling A's friends (by falsely claiming to respect them), and allows for A to have respect for people who also disrespect people A disrepects. After the multiplication is performed, the following invariant holds: '`total` contains the implied respect of p from `p[0]` to `b`':


So, given two people, A and B, there is some number of paths between A and B. The distribution of the implied respects on each of these paths gives us information about how A feels about B, as directly expressed by A (if A has expressed an opinion) as well as implied by all the stated respects of the other members of the matrix.  For example, if the distribution is uniformly positive, it means that A probably will respect B. A doesn't directly disrespect B, or respect anyone who disrespects B, or disrespect anyone who B respects. Depending upon who these people are, a uniformly positive distribution will be exceedingly rare.

We can compute the 'total implied respect' from person a to person b by summing the implied respects across all paths from a to b:

    def total_implied_respect(M, a, b):
      return sum([implied_respect(M,p) for p in one_pair_all_paths(M, a, b)])

This 'total implied respect' would be a good proxy for strangers determing whether they wanted to interact with one another. If the interaction between strangers went negatatively, the new negative edges on the graph could be used by both parties to warn their friends.

## Controversial:

The 'total implied respect' from a to be can be compared with the 'explicit stated respect' of a to b, (that is, the value M[a,b]) in order to compute the 'soundness' of a's explicit respect for b.

For example, suppose A says A respects B, C, and D at 1.  Meanwhile, B and C both respect D at -1.  The explicit stated respect of A for D is 1, while the implied respect of A for D is 1 -1 -1 = -1 , because the paths ABD and ACD both have total weight -1.  The divergence between A's 'explicit respect' for D, and the 'implied respect' generated by the matrix suggest that A's respect has less internal consistency.

The explicit respects stated by person `i` correspond to the row `i` of the matrix, and can therefore be considered a vector pointing in the direction `i` says they consider respectable. Likewise, by computing the implied respects of person `i` for each other person `j`, we come up with a vector pointing in the direction that all of the statements in the matrix imply `i` finds respectable.  A simple dot product between the 'explicit respect vector' stated by `i` and the 'implied respect vector if `i`'  has a positive value if the two vectors point in the same direction, and a negative value if they point in opposite directions. Dividing this dot product of 'explicit' and 'implied' respect by the magnitude of the explicit respect gives us a _soundness_  of person `i`'s respect: a higher value means that what person `i` explicitly says they believe is also implied by the overall structure of the graph.  A negative value means that the person's claims do not line up with each other. It's hard to take someone seriously if they say that you have aboslute respect for two people who do not respect each other; it suggests that their notion of respect does not carry as much weight.


# this would make politics much more reasonable. 

The introduction of the 'soundness' metric gives people an incentive to make sure people they respect get along with each other. Each person's respect for other people is subjective - it depends upon and reflects the statements made by each individual person, with the most weight given to the people you respect the most, in keeping with the natural meaning of respect. Soundness, however, is an aboslute metric which can show the relative merit of one person's respect over another's. I personally would lower my respect for people whose respect was unsound, in part because i don't want to lower my soundness, and in part because i can't take you seriously if you say you have high respect for two people who are rude to and hate each other. Choosing one over the other, or lowering your respect for both until they get along, will increase your soundness score. Increasing your respect for two peple who both disrespect each other will decrease your soundness score. 


Our current approach to conflict resolution is for the state to declare one side the winner and the other side the loser. Although this reduces public uncertainty, it does nothign to reduce conflict or stem the resultant damage. This system could exist nicely alongside the judicial system by providing strong incentives for everyone to try to get along and try to respect people as much as possible. If two people begin to disrespect one another, it lowers the soundness of anyone who has explicit or implied respet for both - which means a whole host of parties interested in resolving conflicts between two people. 



